Grid search (part 1 of 2) (#55)
aml4td/website: chapters/grid-search.qmd

---
knitr:
  opts_chunk:
    cache.path: "../_cache/grid/"
---

# Grid Search {#sec-grid}

```{r}
#| label: grid-setup
#| include: false
source("../R/_common.R")

# ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

library(kableExtra)
library(lme4)
library(broom.mixed)
library(tidymodels)
library(finetune)
library(bonsai)
library(patchwork)
library(rlang)
library(future)

# ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

source("../R/setup_two_class_example.R")

set.seed(943)
sim_tr <- sim_logistic(2000, sim_f)

set.seed(14)
sim_rs <- vfold_cv(sim_tr)

set.seed(14)
sim_nested_rs <- nested_cv(sim_tr, outside = vfold_cv(), inside = vfold_cv())

load("../RData/grid_benchmarks.RData")

# ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Set Options

> plan("multisession")

Author: The latest version of tune suggests using the future package to setup the parallel workers.

\State $f()$: model pipeline 
\State $\Theta$: Parameter set ($s \times m$) with candidates $\theta_j$
\For{$j=1$ \To $s$}
  \State Generate $\hat{Q}_{j} =$ \Call{Resample}{$\mathfrak{D}^{tr}, f(\cdot;\theta_j), M(\mathfrak{D}^{tr}, B)$} corresponding to candidate $\theta_j$.
\EndFor
\State Determine $\hat{\theta}_{opt}$ that optimizes $\hat{Q}_{j}$.
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

:::

::: {.column width="10%"}

:::

::::

Grid search for tuning parameter optimization that loops over the resampling algorithm shown in @alg-resample.

:::

```{r}
#| label: grids
#| include: false

bst_spec <- 
  boost_tree(learn_rate = tune(), trees = tune()) %>% 
  set_mode("classification")%>% 
  set_engine("lightgbm")

bst_wflow <-
  workflow() %>%
  add_model(bst_spec) %>%
  add_formula(class ~ A + B)

bst_param <- 
  bst_wflow %>% 
  extract_parameter_set_dials() %>% 
  update(learn_rate = learn_rate(c(-3, -1)))

bst_reg <-
  grid_regular(bst_param, levels = c(5, 3)) %>%
  mutate(grid = "Regular")

sfd_size <- nrow(bst_reg)

set.seed(nrow(bst_reg))
bst_random <-
  grid_random(bst_param, size = sfd_size) %>%
  mutate(grid = "Random")

> bst_sfd <- grid_space_filling(bst_param, size = sfd_size) %>%

Author: This requires the latest version of dials.

  mutate(grid = "Space-Filling")

seq_tree <- sort(unique(bst_reg$trees))
txt_tree <- knitr::combine_words(seq_tree)

seq_ord <- format(sort(unique(log10(bst_reg$learn_rate))))
seq_ord <- paste0("10<sup>", seq_ord, "</sup>")
lr_ord <- knitr::combine_words(seq_ord)

bst_grids <- 
  bind_rows(bst_reg, bst_random, bst_sfd) %>%
  mutate(
    grid = factor(grid, levels = c("Regular", "Random", "Space-Filling"))
  )
```

> To demonstrate, this chapter will initially focus on grids for a boosted tree model with two tuning parameters. Recall that a boosted tree is a collection of individual decision trees created sequentially. One parameter related to the process of creating the ensemble is the learning rate: the next tree uses information from the last tree to improve it. An important parameter is how much, or how _fast_ it learns. It could be that some data sets desire a large number of trees that evolve slowly (i.e., low learning rate), and other data sets work best with fewer trees that change rapidly. The learning rate parameter must be greater than zero. Boosted tree models typically work in the range of 10<sup>-5</sup> to  10<sup>-1</sup>. This parameter is best conceptualized in log units. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To demonstrate, this chapter will initially focus on grids for a boosted tree model with two tuning parameters. Recall that a boosted tree is a collection of individual decision trees created sequentially. One parameter related to the process of creating the ensemble is the learning rate: the next tree uses information from the last tree to improve it. An important parameter is how much, or how _fast_ it learns. It could be that some data sets need a large number of trees that evolve slowly (i.e., low learning rate) to find an optimal value of the performance metric.  Alternatively, other data sets require fewer trees that change rapidly for optimal predictive performance. The learning rate parameter must be greater than zero, and is typically in the range of 10<sup>-5</sup> to  10<sup>-1</sup>.  Because the magnitude of this parameter is small, it is best conceptualized in log units. 
```

> We'll illustrate different strategies using this model setup with varying configurations of the learning rate and the number of trees in the ensemble. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll illustrate different strategies of grid search using this model setup with varying configurations of the learning rate and the number of trees in the ensemble. 
```

      mutate(grid = "Space-Filling")
  ) %>% 
  mutate(`learn_rate (log-10)` = log10(learn_rate)) %>% 
  select(-learn_rate) %>% 
  pivot_longer(
    c(trees, `learn_rate (log-10)`),
    names_to = "parameter",
    values_to = "value"
  ) 
```

We’ll use the simulated training set in @sec-complexity with the same 10-fold cross-validation scheme described there. Once again, Brier scores were used to measure how well each of the `r nrow(bst_reg)`  configurations of boosted tree model predicted the data. @fig-bst-regular-grid-tuning shows the results: a single tree is a poor choice (due to underfitting), and there are several learning rate values that work well. Even though this is not a diverse set of candidate values, we can probably pick out a reasonable candidate with a small Brier score, such as `r bst_reg_best` (although there are a few other candidates that would be good choices). 

```{r}
#| label: fig-bst-regular-grid-tuning
#| echo: false
#| out-width: 50%
#| fig-width: 4
#| fig-height: 3.5
#| fig-cap: "The boosted tree tuning results for the regular grid shown in @fig-bst-grids."

autoplot(bst_reg_res)  +
  labs(y = "Brier Score") +
  theme(legend.position = "top")
```

> The pattern shown in this visualization is interesting: the trajectory for the number of trees is different for different values of the learning rate. The large two learning rates are similar, showing that the optimal value is in the mid- to low-range of our grid. The results for the smallest learning rate indicates that better performance might be found using _more_ trees than we used in our grid. This indicates that there is an _interaction effect_ in our tuning parameters (just as we saw for predictors in @sec-interactions). This might not affect how we select the best candidate value for this grid, but it does help build some intuition for this particular model that might come in handy when you tune future models. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pattern shown in this visualization is interesting: the trajectory for the number of trees is different for different values of the learning rate. The two larger learning rates are similar, showing that the optimal number of trees is in the low- to mid-range of our grid. The results for the smallest learning rate indicate that better performance might be found using _more_ trees than were evaluated. This indicates that there is an _interaction effect_ in our tuning parameters (just as we saw for predictors in @sec-interactions). This might not affect how we select the best candidate value for the grid, but it does help build some intuition for this particular model that might come in handy when tuning future models. 
```

> Gaining intituion is much easier for regular grids than other designs since we have a full set of combinations. As we’ll see shortly, this interaction is very hard to see for a space-filling design. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gaining intuition is much easier for regular grids than other designs since we have a full set of combinations. As we’ll see shortly, this interaction is very hard to see for a space-filling design. 
```

The primary downside to regular grids is that, as the number of tuning parameters increases, the number of points required to fill the space becomes extremely large (due to the curse of dimensionality). However, for some models and pre-processing methods, regular grids can be very efficient despite the number of tuning parameters (see the following section that describes the "submodel trick").  

## Irregular Grids {#sec-irregular-grid}

Irregular grids are not factorial in nature. A simple example is a _random grid_ where points are randomly placed using a uniform distribution on an appropriate range for each tuning parameter. A design of size `r sfd_size` is shown in @fig-bst-grids. There are some gaps and clustering of the points, but the space for each individual dimension is covered well. The tuning results are shown in the top panels of @fig-bst-irregular-grid-tuning. Because it is an irregular design, we can't use the same visualization as in @fig-bst-regular-grid-tuning. Instead, a "marginal" plot is shown, where each numeric tuning parameter is plotted against performance in a separate panel. 

> The top left panel suggests that a very small learning rate is very bad, but otherwise, there is not a strong trend. For the number of trees (in the top right panel), a very small should be avoided, and perhaps the maximum number tested would be a good choice. From this plot, it is very difficult to discover the interaction effect seen with the regular grid. However, this marginal plot is the main technique for visualizing the results when there are a moderate to large number of tuning parameters. The numerically best candidate was not too dissimilar from the regular grid: `r bst_rnd_best`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The top left panel suggests that a very small learning rate is bad, but otherwise, there is not a strong trend. For the number of trees (in the top right panel), a small number of trees should be avoided, and perhaps the maximum number tested would be a good choice. From this plot, it is very difficult to discover the interaction effect seen with the regular grid. However, this marginal plot is the main technique for visualizing the results when there are a moderate to large number of tuning parameters. The numerically best candidate was not too dissimilar from the regular grid: `r bst_rnd_best`
```

Reviewer: Is it possible to discover the interaction effect with this figure?  If not, I would suggest changing "From this plot, it is very difficult to..." to "From this plot, it is impossible to..."

> The top left panel suggests that a very small learning rate is bad, but otherwise, there is not a strong trend. For the number of trees (in the top right panel), a small number of trees should be avoided, and perhaps the maximum number tested would be a good choice. From this plot, it is very difficult to discover the interaction effect seen with the regular grid. However, this marginal plot is the main technique for visualizing the results when there are a moderate to large number of tuning parameters. The numerically best candidate was not too dissimilar from the regular grid: `r bst_rnd_best`

Author: ```suggestion
The top left panel suggests that a very small learning rate is bad, but otherwise, there is not a strong trend. For the number of trees (in the top right panel), a small number of trees should be avoided, and perhaps the maximum number tested would be a good choice. From this plot, it is impossible to discover the interaction effect seen with the regular grid. However, this marginal plot is the main technique for visualizing the results when there are a moderate to large number of tuning parameters. The numerically best candidate was not too dissimilar from the regular grid: `r bst_rnd_best`
```

```{r}
#| label: fig-lhs-sampled
#| echo: false
#| out-width: 90%
#| fig-width: 9
#| fig-height: 3
#| fig-cap: Three replicate Latin hypercube sampling designs of size ten for two parameters. Each design uses different random numbers. The grid lines illustrate the 100 hypercubes used to generate the values.  

make_lhc <- function(ind, m, s) {
  des <- DiceDesign::lhsDesign(s, m, seed = ind + 287)$design
  colnames(des) <- paste("Parameter", letters[1:ncol(des)])
  des <- as_tibble(des)
  des$Replicate <- paste("Replicate", ind)

  des
}

set.seed(202)
map_dfr(1:3, ~ make_lhc(.x, 2, 10)) %>% 
  ggplot(aes(`Parameter a`, `Parameter b`)) + 
  geom_point(cex = 1.5) + 
  coord_equal() +
  geom_hline(yintercept = seq(0, 1, by = 1 / 10), alpha = 1 / 10) +
  geom_vline(xintercept = seq(0, 1, by = 1 / 10), alpha = 1 / 10) +
  lims(x = 0:1, y = 0:1) +
  theme(panel.grid.minor = element_blank()) + 
  facet_wrap(~ Replicate) +
  theme(
    panel.grid.major = element_blank(),
    panel.grid.minor = element_blank(),
  )
```

> Technically, these designs cover the space of each predictor univariately. However, large multivariate regions can be empty. For example, one design only samples combinations along the diagonal. Additional constraints can make the design more consistent with our desires. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technically, these designs cover the space of each predictor uniformly. However, large multivariate regions can be empty. For example, one design only samples combinations along the diagonal. Additional constraints can make the design more consistent with our desires. 
```

```{r}
#| label: design-crit
#| include: false

rnd_maxmin <-
  encode_set(bst_random %>% select(-grid), pset = bst_param, as_matrix = TRUE) %>% 
  DiceDesign::mindist() %>% 
  round(2)

sfd_maxmin <-
  encode_set(bst_sfd %>% select(-grid), pset = bst_param, as_matrix = TRUE) %>% 
  DiceDesign::mindist() %>% 
  round(2)

reg_maxmin <-
    encode_set(bst_reg %>% select(-grid), pset = bst_param, as_matrix = TRUE) %>% 
    DiceDesign::mindist() %>% 
    round(2)
```

> For example, we could choose points to maximize the minimum pairwise distances between the candidates. These designs are usually referred to as MaxiMin designs [@pronzato2017minimax]. Comparing the two irregular designs in @fig-bst-grids, the random grid has a maximum minimum distance between candidates  of `r rnd_maxmin`. In contrast, the corresponding space-filling design's value (`r sfd_maxmin`) is `r round(sfd_maxmin/rnd_maxmin, 1)`-fold larger^[Using Euclidean distance.]. The latter design was optimized its coverage, and we can see far less redundancy in the optimized design. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, we could choose points to maximize the minimum pairwise distances between the candidates. These designs are usually referred to as MaxiMin designs [@pronzato2017minimax]. Comparing the two irregular designs in @fig-bst-grids, the random grid has a maximum minimum distance between candidates  of `r rnd_maxmin`. In contrast, the corresponding space-filling design's value (`r sfd_maxmin`) is `r round(sfd_maxmin/rnd_maxmin, 1)`-fold larger^[Using Euclidean distance.]. The latter design was optimized for coverage, and we can see far less redundancy in this design. 
```

A similar method, initially proposed by @audze1977new, maximizes a function of the inverse distances between $s$ candidate points: 

$$
criterion = \sum_{i=1}^s \sum_{j=1,\;i\ne j}^s\frac{1}{dist(\theta_i, \theta_j)^2}
$$

@bates2004formulation devised search methods to find optimal designs for this criterion.

Some other space-filling designs of note: 

- Maximum entropy sampling selects points based on assumptions related to the distributions of the tuning parameters and their covariance matrix [@shewry1987maximum;@joseph2015maximum]. 

> - Uniform designs [@fang2000uniform;@wang2022design] are designs that optimally allocate points so that they are uniformly distributed in the space. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Uniform designs [@fang2000uniform;@wang2022design] optimally allocate points so that they are uniformly distributed in the space. 
```

> While these methods can be constructed generally by sampling random points and using a search method to optimize a specific criterion, there has been scholarship that has pre-optimized designs for some combination of the number of tuning parameters and the requested grid size. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While these methods can be generally constructed by sampling random points and using a search method to optimize a specific criterion, there has been scholarship that has pre-optimized designs for some combination of the number of tuning parameters and the requested grid size. 
```

The advantage of space-filling designs over random designs is that, for smaller designs, the candidates do a better job covering the space and have a low probability of producing redundant points. Also, it is possible to create a space-filling design so that the candidates for each numerical parameter are nearly equally spaced (as was done in @fig-bst-grids). 

Many designs assume that all the tuning parameter values are quantitative. That may not always be the case. For example, K-nearest neighbors can adjust its predictions by considering how far the cost are from a new point; more distant points should not have the same influence as close cost. A weighting function can be used for this purpose. For example, weights based on the inverse of the distance between neighbors may produce better results. Equal weighting is often called a “rectangular weighting” function. The type of algebraic function used for weighting is a qualitative tuning parameter. 

> A simple workaround for creating a space-filling design is to repeatthe unique parameter values as if they were $s$ distinct values when making the design. This allows them to be used with a Latin hypercube design and any space-filling design that uses this approach is not technically optimal. Practically speaking, this is an effective approach for tuning models.  However, there are _sliced_ LHD that can accomplish the same goal [@qian2012sliced;@ba2015optimal].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A simple workaround for creating a space-filling design is to repeat the unique parameter values as if they were $s$ distinct values when making the design. This allows them to be used with a Latin hypercube design and any space-filling design that uses this approach is not technically optimal. Practically speaking, this is an effective approach for tuning models.  However, there are _sliced_ LHD that can accomplish the same goal [@qian2012sliced;@ba2015optimal].
```
